2WALT WHITMAN has somewhere a fine andjust distinction between "loving by allowance" and ." loving witIt personal love!' This distinction applies to books as well
as to men and women ; and in the case of tJie not very
numerous authors wJio are the objects of the personal
affection, it brings a curious consequence with it. There
is much more difference as to their best work than in the case ofthose others who are loved " by allowance" by convention, and because it is felt to be the right and proper thing
to love them. And in the sect -fairly large and yet
unusually choice of Austenians or fanites, there would
probably be found partisans of the claim to primacy of
almost every one of the novels. To some tJie delightful
freshness and humour of Northanger Abbey, its completeness, finish, and entrain, obscure tJie undoubted critical
facts that its scale is small, and its scheme, after all, that
of burlesque or parody, a kind in which the first rank is reached with difficulty. Persuasion, relatively faint in
tone, and not enthralling in interest, has devotees who
exalt above all the otJiers its exquisite delicacy and keeping.
TJie catastrophe of Mansfield Park is admittedly theatrical,
the hero and heroine are insipid, and the author has almost
X PREFACE.
wiekedly destroyed all romantic infcrest bv express!Y admitting tJiat Edmund only took Fanny because Mary sJiocked
him, and tJiat Fanny migJit very likely Jiave taken Crawfordif he had been a little more assiduous; yet t/ie matchless
rehearsal-scenes and tJic characters of JIj-s. Morris andothers hare secured, I believe, a considerable party for it. Sense and Sensibility has perhaps the fewest out-and-outadmirers ; but it does not want them.
I suppose, however, that the majority of at least competentvotes would, all things considered, be divided between Emmaand the present book ; and perhaps t/ie vulgar verdict (if
indeed a fondness for Miss Alisten be not of itself a patentof exemption from any possible charge of vulgarity} wouldgo for Emma. // is the larger, the more varied, the morepopular ; the author had by the time of its composition seen rather more of the world, and had improved her general,
though not her most peculiar and characteristic dialogue ; such figures as Miss Bates, as the Eltons, cannot but
unite the suffrages of everybody. On the. other /land, I, for my part, declare for Pride and Prejudice unhesitatingly.
It seems to me the most perfect, the jnost characteristic, the
most eminently quintessential of its authors works; andfor this contention in such narrow space as is pen/lifted to me, Ipropose here to show cause. In tlie first place, the book (it may be barely necessary to remind the reader] was in its Jirst shape written very early,
somewhere about 1796, when Miss Austen wasbarely twentvone ; though it was revised andfinished at Chawton somefifteen years later, and was not published till 1813, only
four years before her death. I do not know whether, in
PREFACE. xi
this combination of tJie fresJi and vigorous projection of
youth) and tJie critical revision of middle life, there may
be traced the distinct superiority in point of construction,
wJiicJi, as it seems to me, it possesses over all tJie otliers. The plot, though not elaborate, is almost regular enough for
Fielding ; hardly a character, hardly an incident could be
retrenched without loss to the story. The elopement ofLydia
and WickJiam is not, like that of Crawford and Mrs.
Rushworth, a coup de theatre ; it connects itself in^ the
strictest way with the course of the story earlier, and
brings about the denouement with complete propriety. All
the minor passages the loves of Jane and Bingley, the
advent of Mr. Collins, the visit to Hunsford, tJie Derbyshire tour Jit in after the same unostentatious, but masterly
fashion. There is no attempt at the hide-and-seek, in-andout business, which in the transactions between Frank
Churchill and Jane Fair-fax contributes no doubt a good
deal to the intrigue of Emma, but contributes it in afashion
which I do not think the best feature of that otherwise
admirable book. Although Miss Austen always liked
something of the misunderstanding kind, wJiiclt afforded
her opportunities for the display of the peculiar and incomparable talent to be noticedpresently, she has been satisfied
here with the perfectly natural occasions provided by the
false account of Darcy's conduct given by WickJiam, and
by the awkwardness (arising with equal naturalness] from
the gradual transformation of Elizabeths own feelings
from positive aversion to actual love. I do not know
whether the all-grasping Jiand of tJie playwright has ever
been laid upon Pride and Prejudice ; and I dare say that,
xii PREFACE.
if it were, :'v situations :csuld / ve not startling
garish enough for the footlights, the cha: -sc/ieme too
:lc ami delicate forpit . \ * I gi :.'lcry. But if the attempt
-... . :./t \ it n'oiila
7 certainly not be liampe ed by any
"
1those .' ." lesses of construction, u . retimes disga;\
the com :nfences of ichich the : :!ist can a-rail hiins. tyear it .v on the sta^
I think, h. :. : . ", though t/ie : '. %Jti u ill doubtless seem' to me : -tan one sclwol of critics> that construction
9 the highest merit, t'.:.'. icest gift, rf tJie * i-elist. It
'-' '..v :tJier gifts andgraces mesi advantageously to the
' eye ; and tlie -n'ant of it i~cill sometimes mar t.
5 :iabh\ though not quite consciously to eyes no means ultra-critical. But a :. badly-built
celled in patJietic or Jtumorous character, or I'cJiicJi :immate command of dialogue -pcrluips the
rarest of all faculties '.could infinitely better thingthan afaultless plot acted and told by puppets with pebblesin their months. And despite the ability \~cJiicJi Miss Austenhas shoii'n in -icorking out the story, I for one should putPride and Prejudice far tower if it did not contain n'/uit n to me the rery masterpieces of Miss Aiisteris humourand of herfaculty of character . . ::ion masterpieces u '. :v indeed admit John Thorpe, the Eltons, Mrs. Xor
and one or tn'o others to tJteir company, but li'ho, in oneinstance certainly, andpcr/iaps in others, are still superiorto them.
The characteristics of Miss Austen's humour are so subtle and delicate that they are, perhaps, at all timeseasier to apprehend than to express, and at any particular
PREFACE. xiii time likely to be differently apprehended by different persons.
To me this humour seems to possess a greater affinity, on the
whole, to tJiat of Addison than to any otJier of the numerous
species of this great BritisJi genus. The differences of
scheme, of time, of subject, of literary convention, are, of
course, obvious enough ; the difference of sex does not,
perhaps, count for much, for there was a distinctly feminine
element in "Mr. Spectator" and in Jane Austens genius
tJiere was, though nothing mannisJi, much that was masculine. But the likeness of quality consists in a great number ofcommon subdivisions ofquality demureness, extreme
minuteness of touch, avoidance of loud tones and glaring
effects. Also there is in both a certain not inJut man or
21 namiable cruelty. It is the custom with those whojudge
grossly to contrast the good nature of Addison with the
savagery of Swift, the mildness of Miss Austen with the
boisterousness of Fielding and Smollett, even with the
ferociouspracticaljokes that her immediatepredecessor, Miss
Burney, allowed without very much protest. Yet, both in
Mr. Addison and in Miss Austen there is, though a re- strained and well-mannered^ an insatiable and ruthless
delight in roastingand cutting up afool. A man in the early
eighteenth century, of course, could pusli t/iis taste further
than a lady in the early nineteenth ; and no doubt Miss
Austen's principles, as well as her heart, would have shrunk
from such things as the letterfrom the unfortunate husband
in the Spectator, who describes, with all the gusto and all
the innocence in the world, how his wife and his friend
induce him to play at blind-man s-buff. But another
Spectator letter that of the damsel of fourteen who
xiv PREFACE.
wishes to marry Mr. Shapely, and assures Jicr selectedMentor that " he admires your Spectators mightily
"
might have been written by a rather more ladylike andintelligent Lydia Bennet in the days of Lydids greatgrandmother ; while, on the other hand, some (I thinkunreasonably) have found
" cynicism
' in toucJies of MissAustens own, such as her satire of Mrs. Musgroves self- deceiving regrets over Jier son. But this word " cynical
'''
is one of the most misused in the English language,especially vvJien, by a glaring and gratuitous falsificationof its original sense, it is applied, not to rough and snarling invective, but to gentle and oblique satire. If cynicismmeans the perception of
" the other side," the sense of
" theaccepted hells beneath" the consciousness that motives arenearly always mixed, and that to seem is not identical witJi to be if this be cynicism, then every man and woman whois not a fool, who does not care to live in a fool's paradise,who has knowledge of nature and the world and life, is acynic. And in that sense Miss Austen certainly was one. She may even have been one in the further sense that, like
her own Mr. Bennet, she took an epicurean delight in dissecting, in displaying, in setting at work herfools and hermean persons. I think she did take this delight, and I donot think at all the worse of herfor it as a woman, whileshe was immensely the better for it as an artist.
In respect of her art generally, Mr. Goldwin Smith hastruly observed that " metaphor has been exhausted in depicting the perfection of it, combined with the narrownessof her field ; " and lie has justly added that we need notgo beyond her own comparison to the art of a miniature
PREFACE. XV
painter. To make this latter observation quite exact we
must not use tJie term miniature in its restricted sense, and
must think rather of Memling at one end of the history of
painting and Meissonier at the other, than ofCosway or any
of his kind. And I am not so certain that I should myself
use the word " narrow
" in connection with her. If her
world is a microcosm, the cosmic quality of it is at least as eminent as the littleness. She does not touch what she did
not feel herself called to paint ; I am not so sure that she
could not have painted what she did not feel herself called
to touch. It is at least remarkable that in two very sJiort
periods of writing one of about tJiree years, and another
of not much more than five she executed six capital works,
and has not left a single failure. It is possible that the
romantic paste in her composition zvas defective : we must
always remember that hardly anybody born in her decodethat of the eighteenth-century seventies independently ex- hibited the full romantic quality. Even Scott required hill
and mountain and ballad, even Coleridge metaphysics and
German to enable them to chip the classical shell. Miss
Austen was an English girl, brought up in a country
retirement, at the time when ladies went back into t/ie
house if there was a white frost which might pierce their
kid shoes, when a sudden cold was the subject of the gravest
fears, when their studies, their ways, tJieir conduct were
subject to all those fantastic limits and restrictions against
which Mary Wollstonecraft protested with better general
sense than particular taste or judgment. Miss Austen,
too, drew back when the white frost touched her shoes ; but
I think she would have made a pretty goodjourney even in a black one.
xvi PREFACE.
For if her knowledge was not very extended, she knewtwo tilings which onlygenius knows. The one was Jiumamty,and the ot/ier was art. On the first head she could notmake a mistake ; her men, tJiougJi limited, are true, andJier women are, in the old sense,
" absolute'' As to art, ifshe has never tried idealism, Jier realism is real to a degreewhich makes the false realism of our own day look merelydead-alive. Take almost any Frenchman, except the late M.de Maupassant, and watch him laboriouslypiling up strokesin the hope ofgiving a complete impression. You get none;you are lucky if, discarding two-thirds of what he gives,you can shape a real impression out of the rest. But withMiss Austen the myriad, trivial, unforced strokes build upthe picture like magic. NotJiing is false ; nothing is superfluous. When (to take the present book only} Mr. Collinschanged his mind from Jane to Elizabeth " while Mrs.Bennet was stirring the fire
" (and we know how Mrs.Bennet would have stirred the fire], when Mr. Darcy" brought his coffee-cup back himself," the touch in eachcase is like that of Swift
" taller by the breadth of mynail" -which impressed the half-reluctant Thackeray withjust and outspoken admiration. Indeed, fantastic as itmay seem, I should put Miss Austen as near to Swift insome ways, as I have put her to Addison in others.
This Swiftian quality appears in the present novel as itappears nowhere else in the character of the immortal,the ineffable J\Ir. Collins. Mr. Collins is really great; far greater than anything Addison ever did, almost greatenough for Fielding or for Swift himself. It has beensaid that no one ever was like him. But in the first
PREFACE. xvii
place, he was like him ; Jie is tJiere alive, imperishable, more
real than hundreds ofprime ministers and archbishops, of
" metals, semi-metals, and distinguished philosophers? In
the second place, it is rash, I tJtink, to conclude that an
actual Mr. Collins was impossible or non-existent at the
end of the eighteenth century. It is very interesting that
we possess, in this same gallery, what may be called a
spoiled first draught, or an unsuccessful study of him, in
JoJm DasJiwood. The formality, the under-breeding, the
meanness, are there ; but the portrait is only half alive,
and is felt to be even a little unnatural. Mr. Collins is perfectly natural, and perfectly alive. In fact, for all
the "miniature" tJiere is something gigantic in the way
in which a certain side, and more than one, of Jmmanity,
and especially eighteenth-century humanity, its Philistinism,
its well-meaning but hide-bound morality, its formal
pettiness, its grovelling respect for rank, its materialism,
its selfishness, receives exhibition. Iwill not admit that one
speech or one action of this inestimable man is incapable
of being reconciled with reality, and I sJwuld not wonder
if many of these words and actions are historically true. But the greatness of Mr. Collins could not have been
so satisfactorily exhibited if his creatress had not adjusted
so artfully to him the figures of Mr. Bennet and of Lady
Catherine de Bourgh. The latter, like Mr. Collins himself, has been charged with exaggeration. There is,perJiaps, a very faint shade of colour for the charge ; but it seems
to me very faint indeed. Even now I do not think that it would be impossible to find persons, especially female
persons, not necessarily of noble birth, as overbearing, as
b
xviii PREFACE.
self-centred, as neglectful ofgood manners, as Lady Catherine. A hundred years ago, an earl's daughter, the LadyPowerful (if not exactly Bountiful) of an out-of-the-waycountry parish, rich, long out of marital authority, andso forth, had opportunities of developing these agreeablecharacteristics which seldom present themselves now. Asfor Mr. Bennet, Miss Austen, and Mr. Darcy, and evenMiss Elizabeth herself, were, I am inclined to think,rather hard on him for the " impropriety
" of his conduct.His wife was evidently, and must always have been,a quite irreclaimable fool ; and unless he had shot heror himself there was no way out of it for a manofsense and spirit but the ironic. From no other pointof view is he open to any reproach, except for an ex-cusable and not unnatural helplessness at the crisis ofthe elopement, and Ids utterances are the most acutelydelightful in the consciously humorous kind in the kindthat we laugh with, not at that even Miss Austen hasput into the mouth of any of her characters. It is difficultto know whether he is most agreeable when talkingtohis wife, or when putting Mr. Collins through his paces;but the general sense of the world has probably been rightin preferring to the first rank his consolation to the formerwhen she maunders over the entail, "My dear, do notgive way to such gloomy thoughts. Let us hope for betterthings. Let us flatter ourselves that I may be the sur-vivor ;
" and Ids inquiry to his colossal cousin as to thecompliments which Mr. Collins has just related as madeby himself to Lady Catherine,
" May I ask whether thesepleasing attentions proceedfrom the impulse of the moment,
PREFACE xix
or are the result of previous study ?
" These are the
things which give Miss Austen's readers the pleasant
shocks, the delightful thrills, which are felt by the readers
of Swift, of Fielding, and we may here add, of Thackeray,
as they are felt by the readers of no other English author
offiction outside of these four.
The goodness of the minor characters in Pride and
Prejudice has been already alluded to, and it makes a
detailed dwelling on their beauties difficult in any space, and
impossible in this. Mrs. Bennet we have glanced at, and
it is not easy to say whether she is more exquisitely amusing
or more horribly true. Much the same may be said of
Kitty and Lydia ; but it is not every author, even of
genius, who would have differentiated with such unerring
skill the effects of folly and vulgarity of intellect and
disposition working upon the common weaknesses of woman
at such different ages. With Mary, Miss Austen has
taken rather less pains, though she has been even more
unkind to her; not merely in the text, but, as we
learn from those interesting traditional appendices which
Mr. Austen Leigh has given us, in dooming her privately
to marry
" one of Mr. Philips s clerks" The habits offirst
copying and then retailing moral sentiments, of playing
and singing too long in public, are, no doubt, grievous and
criminal ; but perhaps poor Mary zvas rather the scapegoat
of the sins of blue stockings in that Fordyce-belectured
generation. It is at any rate difficult not to extend to Jier
a share of the respect and affection (affection and respect
of a peculiar kind; doubtless], with which one regards
Mr. Collins, when she draws the moral of Lydia's fall. I
XX PREFACE.
sometimes wish tJiat the exigencies ofthe story hadpermittedMiss Austen to unite these personages, and ttms at onceachieve a notable mating" and soothe poor Mrs. Bennefsanguish over the entail.
The Binglcys and the Gardiners and the Lucases, MissDarcy and Miss de Bourgli, Jane, WickJiam, and the rest,must pass without special comment, further than theremark that Charlotte Lucas (her egregious papa, thoughdelightful, is just a little on the thither side of the linebetween comedy andfarce] is a wonderfully clever study indrab of one kind, and that WickJiam (though somethingof Miss Austen's hesitation of touch in dealing with youngmen appears] is a not nmcJi less notable sketch in drab ofanother. Only genius could have made Charlotte whatshe is, yet not disagreeable ; WickJiam what he is, withoutinvesting him either with a cheap Don fuanish attractive-ness or a disgusting rascality. But the hero and theheroine are not tints to be dismissed.
Darcy lias always seemed to me byfar the best and mostinteresting ofMiss Austen's heroes ; the only possible competitor being Henry Tilney, whosepart is so slight andsimplethat it hardly enters into comparison. It has sometimes, Ibelieve, been urged that his pride is unnatural atfirst in itsexpression and later in its yielding, while hisfalling in loveat all is not extremelyprobable. Here again I cannot go withthe objectors. Darcy's own account of the way in which hispride had been pampered, is perfectly rational and sufficient ;and nothing could be, psychologically speaking, a causa verierfor its sudden restoration to healthy conditions than theshock of Elizabeth's scornful refusal acting on a nature
PREFACE. xxi
ex hypothesi generous. Nothing in even our author is finer
and more delicately toucJied than the change of his demeanour at the sudden meeting in the grounds of
Pemberley. Had he been a bad prig or a bad coxcomb,
Jie migJit have been still smarting under his rejection, or suspicious that the girl had come husband-hunting.
His being neither is exactly consistent with the probable
feelings of a man spoilt in the common sense, but not really
injured in disposition, and thoroughly in love. As for his
being in love, Elisabeth has given as just an exposition
of the causes of that phenomenon as Darcy lias of the
conditions of his imregenerate state, only she has of course not counted in what was diie to her own personal charm.
The secret of that charm many men and not a few
women, from Miss Austen herself downwards, Jiave felt,
and like most charms it is a thing rather to be felt than to be explained. ElizabetJi of course belongs to the allegro or
allegra division of the army of Venus. Miss Austen was
always provokingly chary of description in regard to her
beauties ; and except the fine eyes, and a hint or two that
she had at any rate sometimes a bright complexion, and was
not very tall, we hear nothing about her looks. But her
chiefdifferencefrom other heroines of the lively type seems
to lie first in Jier being distinctly clever almost strongminded, in the better sense of that objectionable word and
secondly in Jier being entirely destitute of ill-nature for all
her propensity to tease and the sharpness of her tongue.
ElizabetJi can give at least as good as she gets when sJie is attacked ; but she never "scratches" and she never attacks
first. Some of the merest obsoletenesses of phrase and
XXll PREFACE.
manner give one or two of her early speeches a sligJii
pertness, but that is notliing, and when she comes to seriousbusiness, as in tlie great proposal scene with Dairy (whichis, as it should be, the climax of the interest ofthe book), andin the final ladies' battle witJi Lady Catherine, she is unexceptionable. Then too she is a perfectly natural girl.
She does not disguise from herself or anybody that sheresents Darcys first ill-manneredpersonality with as personal a feeling. (By the -way, the reproach that the ill- manners of this speech are overdone is certainly unjust ; forthings of the same kind, expressed no doubt less stiltedly
but more coarsely, might have been heard in more than oneball-room during this very yearfrom persons w/io ought to have been no worse bred than Darcy^} And she lets the
injury done to Jane and the contempt shown to the rest ofher family aggravate this resentment in the healthiest
war in the world.
Still, all this does not explain her charm, wJiicJi, takingbeauty as a commonform ofall heroines^ mayperhaps consist
in the addition to herplayfulness, Jierwit, lier affectionate andnatural disposition, of a certain fearlessness very uncommonin heroines of her type and age. Nearly all of them wouldhave been in speechless awe of the magnificent Darcy ; nearly all of them would have palpitated and flutteredat the idea ofproposals, even naughty ones, from thefascinating WickJiam. Elizabeth, witJi nothing offensive, nothingviraginous, nothing of the "New Woman" about her, has by
nature what the best modern (not
" new ") women have byeducation and experience, a perfect freedom from the idea
that all men may bully her if they choose, and that most will
PREFACE. XX111
away with Jier if tJiey can. Though not in the least
41 impudent and mannish grown" she lias no mere sensibility, no nasty niceness about her. The form of passion
common and likely to seem natural in Miss Austen's day
was so invariably connected with the display of one or the
other, or both of these qualities, that she has not made Elisabeth outwardly passionate. But I, at least, have not the
slightest do2ibt that she would have married Darcyjust as
willingly without Pemberley as with it, and anybody who
can read between lines will not find the lovers' conversations
in the final chapters so frigid as they might have looked
to the Delia Cruscans of their own day, andperhaps do look
to the Delia Cruscans of this. A nd, after all, what is the good of seekingfor the reason of charm ? it is there. There were better sense in the sad
mechanic exercise of determining the reason of its absence
where it is not. In the novels of the last hundredyears
tJiere are vast numbers of young ladies with whom it migJit be a pleasure to fall in love ; there are at least five
with whom, as it seems to me, no man oftaste and spirit can
help doing so. Their names are, in chronological order,
Elizabeth Bennet, Diana Vernon, Argemone Lavington,
Beatrix Esmond, and Barbara Grant. I shoidd have been
most in love with Beatrix and Argemone ; I should, I
think, for mere occasional companionship, have preferred
Diana and Barbara. But to live with and to marry, I do
not know that any one of the four can come into competition
with ElizabetJi.
GEORGE SAINTSBUKY.
&**
lustration^.
Frontispiece . Title-page . Dedication . Heading to Preface Heading to List of Illustrations Heading to Chapter I. . " He came down to see the place
" Mr. and Mrs. Bennet . " I hope Mr. Bingley will like it" . "I'm the tallest" . . . . . . . "He rode a black horse"
" When the party entered "
. "
She is tolerable
" Heading to Chapter IV. Heading to Chapter V. . " Without once opening his lips "
. Tailpiece to Chapter V. Heading to Chapter VI.
" The entreaties of several "
. " A note for Miss Bennet "
. "
Cheerful prognostics
" " The apothecary came
" "
Covering a screen
"
PAGE
ivv
viiix xxv
I2
56
9
10
12
151822
24
26
27
3136
40
43
45
XXVI LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.
' ' Mrs. Bennet and her two youngest girls "
. Heading to Chapter X. . " No, no ; stay where you are
: '
. . "
Piling up the fire" ........Heading to Chapter XII. .......Heading to Chapter XIII. .......Heading
' ' to Chapter XIV. .......Protested that he never read novels "
. Heading to Chapter XV. ...... Heading
"
to Chapter XVI. .......The officers of the shire "
5 ' ......Delighted to see their dear friend again
"
. Heading to Chapter XVIII
" Such very superior dancing is not often seen "... " To assure you in the most animated language
"
. Heading to Chapter XX. . . ... " They entered the breakfast-room ".....Heading
"
to Chapter XXI. ...... Walked back with them " Heading
' ' to Chapter XXII. ......." So much love and eloquence "......Protested he must be entirely mistaken "
' ' Whenever she spoke in a low voice "
. Heading to Chapter XXIV. . Heading to "
Chapter XXV. .......Offended two or three young ladies "
. "
Will
' ' you come and see me ?" ......On the stairs " "At the door"
" In conversation with the ladies "
. " Lady Catherine," said she, "
you have given me a treasure
" Heading
"
to Chapter XXX. .......He never failed to inform them
"
" ..... The gentlemen accompanied him "
. Heading to Chapter XXXI
Heading to Chapter XXXII.
"Accompanied by their aunt "
" ......On looking up ". ........Heading to Chapter XXXIV
"
Hearing herself called " .......Heading to Chapter XXXVI
"
Meeting accidentally "
in town "......
His parting obeisance " .......PAGE53
60
67
69
7578
84
87
89
95
97
1 08
"3
118
132 139
146
148 154
156
161
1 66
1 68
175
177
181 189
194
198
200
209
211 213
215
221 225
228
235
243
253
2 56
26l
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. xxvii
PAGE "Dawson" ... . . 263 " The elevation of his feelings
; '
. .....267 " They had forgotten to leave any message
:: .....270 " How nicely we are crammed in !" ......272
Heading to Chapter XL. ... ....278
"
I am determined never to speak of it again
" 283 " When Colonel Miller's regiment went away
'' ....285 "
Tenderly flirting " ..... ...290
The arrival of the Gardiners ........294 "
Conjecturing as to the date " ..... 301 Heading to Chapter XLIV . 318 " To make herself agreeable to all "
. . 321 "
Engaged by the river " ........327
Heading to Chapter XLVI. ..... . 334
"
I have not an instant to lose" .... . . 339 " The first pleasing earnest of their welcome " ....345
The Post 359
"To whom I have related the affair" ......363
Heading to Chapter XLIX . . 368 " But perhaps you would like to read it "
. . . . . 370
" The spiteful old ladies "
. 377 " With an affectionate smile " .... . 385
' ' I am sure she did not listen "
. . . . . . 393 " Mr. Darcy with him " ........404
"
Jane happened to look round " ... . . 415
"Mrs. Long and her nieces " .......420
"
Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak to you ".....422
Heading to Chapter LVI . .431
"After a short survey
"
. 434
" But now it comes out
; '
. . . . . . . . 442 " The efforts of his aunt
" .... . - 44
" Unable to utter a syllable
" ...*...457
" The obsequious civility " ........466
Heading to Chapter LXI 472 The End ...........476
Lmi > i ;
:P
'* III
:
is a truth universal Ivj acknowledged, that a single man in
possession of a good fortune
must be in want of a wife.
However little known the
feelings or views of such a man may be on his first entering a neighbourhood, this ^j ^j truth is so well fixed in the
minds of the surrounding
families, that he is considered
as the rightful property of
some one or other of their
daughters.
"My dear Mr. Bennet,"
said his lady to him one
day,
l% have you heard that
Xetherfield Park is let at last?"
B
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.
Mr. Bennet replied that he had not.
" But it is," returned she ; " for Mrs. Long has justbeen here, and she told me all about it." Mr. Bennet made no answer.
" Do not you want to know who has taken it ?
" criedhis wife, impatiently.
" You want to tell me, and I have no objection tohearing it."
3& Came dowr> *fo Jep TV}? />/ace [Copyright 1894 by George Allen.'] This was invitation enough. o
" Why, my dear, you must know, Mrs. Long says thatNetherfield is taken by a young man of large fortunefrom the north of England ; that he came down onMonday in a chaise and four to see the place, andwas so much delighted with it that he agreed withMr. Morris immediately ; that he is to take possessionbefore Michaelmas, and some of his servants are to be inthe house by the end of next week."
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 3
" What is his name ?
" " Bingley."
" Is he married or single ? " " Oh, single, my dear, to be sure ! A single man of
large fortune ; four or five thousand a year. What a fine
thing for our girls ! " " How so ? how can it affect them ? " " My dear Mr. Bennet," replied his wife,
" how can you
be so tiresome ? You must know that I am thinking of
his marrying one of them."
" Is that his design in settling here ? " " Design ? nonsense, how can you talk so ! But it is very likely that he may fall in love with one of them, and
therefore you must visit him as soon as he comes."
"
I see no occasion for that. You and the girls may
go or you may send them by themselves, which perhaps
will be still better ; for as you are as handsome as any
of them, Mr. Bingley might like you the best of the
party."
" My dear, you flatter me. I certainly have had my
share of beauty, but I do not pretend to be anything
extraordinary now. When a woman has five grown-up
daughters, she ought to give over thinking of her own
beauty."
"In such cases, a woman has not often much beauty
to think of."
" But, my dear, you must indeed go and see Mr. Bingley
when he comes into the neighbourhood."
"
It is more than I engage for, I assure you."
" But consider your daughters. Only think what an
establishment it would be for one of them. Sir William
and Lady Lucas are determined to go, merely on that
account ; for in general, you know, they visit no new
4 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.
comers. Indeed you must go, for it will be impossiblefor us to visit him, if you do not."
" You are over scrupulous, surely. I dare say Mr.Bingley will be very glad to see you ; and I will send afew lines by you to assure him of my hearty consent tohis marrying whichever he chooses of the girls though I must throw in a good word for my little Lizzy."
"
I desire you will do no such thing. Lizzy is not abit better than the others : and I am sure she is not halfso handsome as Jane, nor half so good-humoured asLydia. But you are always giving her the preference."
" They have none of them much to recommend them,"replied he : " they are all silly and ignorant like othergirls ; but Lizzy has something more of quickness thanher sisters."
" Mr. Bennet, how can you abuse your own children insuch a way ? You take delight in vexing me. You haveno compassion on my poor nerves."
" You mistake me, my dear. I have a high respect foryour nerves. They are my old friends. I have heardyou mention them with consideration these twenty yearsat least."
" Ah, you do not know what I suffer."
" But I hope you will get over it, and live to see manyyoung men of four thousand a year come into theneighbourhood."
" It will be no use to us, if twenty such should come,since you will not visit them."
" Depend upon it, my dear, that when there are twenty,I will visit them all." Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts,sarcastic humour, reserve, and caprice, that the experienceof three-and-twenty years had been insufficient to
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 5 make his wife understand his character. Her mind was
less difficult to develope. She was a woman of mean
understanding, little information, and uncertain temper.
When she was discontented, she fancied herself nervous. The business of her life was to get her daughters married : its solace was visiting and news.
- I
{Copyright 1891 by George Allen.]
Jf Acre JW <-n#rey cuifT fie
\Copyright 1894 by George Allen.\ CHAPTER II.
. BENNET was among the earliest of those who waited on Mr.Bingley. He had always intendedto visit him, though to the last alwaysassuring his wife that he should notgo ; and till the evening after the
visit was paid she had no knowledge of it. It was then disclosed in the following manner.Observing his second daughter employed in trimminga hat, he suddenly addressed her with,
"
I hope Mr. Bingley will like it, Lizzy."
" We are not in a way to know what Mr. Bingleylikes," said her mother, resentfully,
" since we are not to
visit."
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 7
" But you forget, mamma," said Elizabeth,
" that we
shall meet him at the assemblies, and that Mrs. Long
has promised to introduce him."
"
I do not believe Mrs. Long will do any such thing.
She has two nieces of her own. She is a selfish, hypocritical woman, and I have no opinion of her."
"No more have I," said Mr. Bennet ; "and I am glad
to find that you do not depend on her serving you."
Mrs. Bennet deigned not to make any reply ; but,
unable to contain herself, began scolding one of her
daughters.
" Don't keep coughing so, Kitty, for heaven's sake ! Have a little compassion on my nerves. You tear them
to pieces."
" Kitty has no discretion in her coughs," said her father ; " she times them ill." "
I do not cough for my own amusement," replied
Kitty, fretfully.
" When is your next ball to be, Lizzy ?
" " To-morrow fortnight."
" Ay, so it is," cried her mother,
" and Mrs. Long does
not come back till the day before ; so, it will be impossible for her to introduce him, for she will not know him
herself."
" Then, my dear, you may have the advantage of your
friend, and introduce Mr. Bingley to lier"
" Impossible, Mr. Bennet, impossible, when I am not
acquainted with him myself; how can you be so teasing ? "
"
I honour your circumspection. A fortnight's acquaint- ance is certainly very little. One cannot know what a man really is by the end of a fortnight. But if we do
not venture, somebody else will ; and after all, Mrs. Long
and her nieces must stand their chance ; and, therefore,
8 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.
as she will think it an act of kindness, if you decline theoffice, I will take it on myself."
The girls stared at their father. Mrs. Bennet said only," Nonsense, nonsense ! " " What can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation ? " cried he. " Do you consider the forms of introduction, and the stress that is laid on them, as nonsense ?
I cannot quite agree with you there. What say" you,Mary? for you are a young lady of deep reflection, I know, and read great books, and make extracts."
Mary wished to say something very sensible, but knewnot how.
"While Mary is adjusting her ideas," he continued,t( let us return to Mr. Bingley."
"
I am sick of Mr. Bingley," cried his wife.
"
I am sorry to hear that; but why did you not tell me so before? If I had known as much this morning,I certainly would not have called on him. It is veryunlucky ; but as I have actually paid the visit, we cannotescape the acquaintance now."
The astonishment of the ladies was just what* hewished that of Mrs. Bennet perhaps surpassing the rest ; though when the first tumult of joy was over, she began todeclare that it was what she had expected all the while.
" How good it was in you, my dear Mr. Bennet ! ButI knew I should persuade you at last. I was sure youloved your girls too well to neglect such an acquaintance.Well, how pleased I am ! and it is such a good joke, too,that you should have gone this morning, and never saida word about it till now."
" Now, Kitty, you may cough as much as you choose,"said Mr. Bennet ; and, as he spoke, he left the room,fatigued with the raptures of his wife.
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 9
" What an excellent father you have, girls," said she,
when the door was shut. "
I do not know how you will ever make him amends for his kindness ; or me either,
for that matter. At our time of life, it is not so pleasant,
I can tell you, to be making new acquaintances every
day ; but for your sakes we would do anything. Lydia,
my love, though you are the youngest, I dare say Mr.
Bingley will dance with you at the next ball."
" Oh," said Lydia, stoutly,
"
I am not afraid ; for though
I am the youngest, I'm the tallest."
The rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing how
soon he would return Mr. Bennet's visit, and determining
when they should ask him to dinner.
'
;< V?^ / .
'& YC& a 6(a.ik ficrje' CHAPTER III. OT all that Mrs. Bennet, however, with the assistance of herfive daughters, could ask onthe subject, was sufficient to
draw from her husband anysatisfactory description of Mr.Bingley. They attacked himin various ways, with barefacedquestions, ingenious suppositions, and distant surmises ; but he eluded the skill of them all ; and they were at